We are driven to find and describe our planet's unrecognized biodiversity because it is disappearing before our eyes. Yet some of this uncharacterized biodiversity has been staring us in the face, almost from the taxonomic start. Consider the neotropical skipper butterfly Astraptes fulgerator (Hesperiidae) (Fig. 1) described in 1775 (1). This butterfly has long been regarded as a single species that is common, variable, and wide-ranging: from the far southern United States to northern Argentina, from the near desert to deep rain forest, from lowlands to middle elevations, and from urban gardens to pristine habitats. However, this view blocks perception of its real complexity.

The rearing of >2,500 wild-caught caterpillars of A. fulgerator during 25 years of biodiversity inventory in the dry forest, rain forest, and cloud forest of the Area de Conservación Guanacaste (ACG) in northwestern Costa Rica (http://janzen.sas.upenn.edu; refs. 2–5) revealed a range of dicotyledonous food plants far too broad for one species of pyrgine hesperiid (as demonstrated by some 31,000 other ACG pyrgine rearing records (http://janzen.sas.upenn.edu). Moreover, divergent color patterns of the caterpillars (Fig. 2) segregated in accord with food plants. Although dissections of 67 male and female genitalia disclosed none of the morphological differentiation that often distinguishes cryptic species of skippers (see, for example, refs. 6–9), close study of adults, sorted by their caterpillar food plant, showed subtle differences in color, pattern, size, and wing shape. Synthesis of information on food plant use, caterpillar color pattern, and adult external phenotypes indicated that A. fulgerator from the ACG was a complex of at least six or seven species. However, it seemed that several more years of linking caterpillar and adult characteristics with food plants would be needed to fully delimit species.

While this query was proceeding, it became apparent that DNA sequencing of a standard gene region or “DNA barcoding” (10) might speed a solution. DNA barcoding can be helpful in species diagnosis because sequence divergences are ordinarily much lower among individuals of a species than between closely related species (11–13). For example, congeneric species of moths show an average sequence divergence of 6.5% in the mitochondrial gene cytochrome c oxidase I (COI), whereas divergences among conspecific individuals average only 0.25% (11). Similar values were obtained in birds, with intraspecific divergences at COI averaging 0.27%, whereas congener divergences averaged 7.93% (14).

In this study, the addition of DNA barcodes to data on food plants, ecological distributions, caterpillar color patterns, and adult facies indicates that A. fulgerator consists of 10 largely sympatric species in the ACG. This result raises the prospect that, over its huge neotropical range, A. fulgerator may comprise many more hidden species. Imagine the biodiversity implications of this result for other wide-ranging, common, and “somewhat variable” species of neotropical animals and plants.